41. (d) The Pharmacy (Amendment) Bill, 2023 | 47. (c) Shafiqur Rahman Barq is a veteran This technique found extraordinary
was introduced inthe Lok Sabha on August | politician associated with the Samajwadi | expression in Mughal monuments, most
3,2023, which amends the Pharmacy Act, | Party (SP) notably in the Ta Mahal in Agra
1935 He was clccted othe Lok Sabla at various | 4. (5 In Indi, the agricultural year is divided
The Pharmacy (Amendment) Bill, 2023 | times from Moradabad as the Samajwadi | broadly into two. main cropping seasons:
seeks 10 revise the Pharmacy Act, 1948, | Party candidate and Sambhal, mostrecenty | Rabi and Khari,
which oversees the pharmacy profession in 2019. “The Rabi cropping season in India starts.
in India, 48. (0) Dadsbhai Naor a prominent nationalist | with the sowing of seeds in October-
The Act's goal is to make sure that only | leader, educator, and intellcetal, wrote | November, coinciding with the onset of the
wained and qualified people work as | “Poverty and Un British Rule in India.” winter season
pharmacists, ensuring the safety of public He was one of the founding members of the It concludes with the harvest in March-
heal, Indian National Congress and served as ts | April, just before the arrival of the sumer

42.) Losriscelebrated nthe Union Territory | 21d, 5th, and 22nd President from 1886 10 | months
of Ladakh and the state of Arunachal 1887, 1893 to 1894 and 1906 to 1907. 55. (¢) Sodium bicarbonate, commonly known
Pradesh to mark the beginning of the new India Post depicted Naoroji on stamps in as baking soda, has the chemical formula
year. 1963, 1997 and 2017. NaHCO, Itis a mild base used in cooking,
“Losar® is the most festive celebration all | 49. (d) K.M. Munshi, a noted Indian writerand | cleaning, and various chemical reactions,
year around. Historian, primarily wrote his iterary works | Sodium bicarbonate releases carbon dioxide
tis celebrated to mark the beginning of the “The Glory of Patan’ in Gujarati, ‘when it reacts with acid oris heated. making
Ladakhi New Year “The Glory of Patan’ was originally | ita key ingredient in baking to help dough
The festival is celebrated on the Ist day of | published as Patan i Prabhuta’in Gujarat, | rise.
the eleventh month of Tibetan Calendar reflecting the rich cultural and historical | NaCl is sodium chloride (common sal),

—— heritage of medieval Gujarat Na,CO, is sodium carbonate (washing
oy ti ones || KM. Munshi vas popularly known by is | soda), and NaOH is sodium hydroxide

recognized us a leading figure in | Pen name Ghanshyam Vyas (caustic soda).
Motemyatam, 50. (d) The Punjab Legislative Council | 56. (a) Capital goods are assets used by
Sh established the Nalanda Dance Research | (Abolition) Act, 1969 was a legislation in | businesses to produce other goods or
Centre and served as he founding principal | India, adopted in 1969. Punjab, along with | services. They are typically long-lasting
of Nalanda Neitya Kala Mahavidslaya in | Some other sates in India, had a bicameral | (durable) and have prolonged Iie cycle.
Mumbai h B legislature that included a Legislative Examples include machinery, tools, and.

Mohiniyattam is an Indian classical dance Assembly and a Legislative Council. equipment.

form that developed and remained populay | Puniababolished it Legislative Councilon | They are neither “Giffen gaods” (a rare
in th sate of Kea 1 January 1970 to simplify its legislative | category of goods where demand increases
structure and reduce administrative costs, as price rises duc to lack of cheaper

44-0) The system of Disrchy, meaning dU) | 51. a) Turmeric. a widely sed spice in Indian | subsites) nor “inferior goods” (goods
goverment, was introduced in British India pubs) nor inferior good” (soos
through the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms | 414 Soulheast Asin cuisine owes fsbright | fr whieh oo
and the Government of India Act, 1919. Uh— Eo ne
In this system, provincial administration was. omer A AR fie on her prestise the correct

andled by elected ministers, nd reserved " )
subjects, controlled by the Governor and properiss Blmushan and then Padma Shri,
pe oo ¥ Unlike tartaric acid (commonly found in | Padma Vibhushan: This is the second-
fruits like grapes), carotene (associated with highest civilian award, given for exceptional
45.(¢) India’s northern region, especially | the orange colour of carrots), or capsaicin | and distinguished service without disineton
the Himalayan belt, experiences a cool | (the heat-inducing compound in chilli | of category:
mountain (alpine) climate. peppers), curcumin s unique to meric. Padma Bhushan This isthe third-highest
The high altitude arcas of states like | 5 (The Indore gharana, renowned sileof | civilian award, ecogniving exceptional and
of Jammu & Kashmir, and Ladakh have by Ustad Amir Khan (1912-1974), Padma Shri: This is the fourth highest
cooler temperatures and receive snowfall Bhimsen Joshi was associated with the civilian award in India. It is awarded for
in winter Kirana Gharana. distinguished contributions in various fields
These regions are significantly cooler | Tunsen was a legendary musician in the | such as ans, education, industry, leraure,
compared to other parts of India due o their | Mughal court but did not establish the | science, ind public service
levation and mountainous erain. Indore Gharana $8. (d) The Vijayanagara Empire was founded

46. (¢) Chandragupta Maurya established Ustad Ghaghe Khuda Baksh is not in the carly 14th century by Harihara 1 and.
the Mauryan Empire in 322 BCE after recognized as the founder of any major Bukka Raya I, who belonged to the Sangama
overthrowing the Nanda dynasty. ‘gharana. dynasty.

The empire's capital was at Pataliputra | 53. (d) Pictra Dura, an Italian term, refers to | They established the kingdom along the

(near modern-day Patna), which became | the technique of using inlaid precious and | southern banks of the Tungabhadra River

a significant political and cultural cenre semi-precious stones to create rica floral | in present-day Karnataka,

Under his leadership, the Mauryan Empire | and geometric patterns in architecture “The later ruling dynasties such as Salua,

became one of the most expansive and | Pietra dura items are generally crafied on Tuluva, and Aravidu came into power ater
consolidated empires in ancient Indi. green, white or black marble base stones the Sangama lineage.

55CMTS Solved Paper-2024 (IID
| |